(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
The next couple of algorithms we'll look at
can be written recursively
and they're often written recursively,
so let's take a brief timeout
and talk about recursion
to make sure we're all on the same page.
A method is a recursive method when it calls itself,
so we're gonna take a look at calculating the factorial
for a number.
As a reminder to calculate the factorial,
you start with the number
and then you multiply it by number minus one
and then you multiply the result by number minus two
and you multiply that result by number minus three et cetera
until you hit zero and then you stop.
So, three factorial would be three times two times one
which equals six.
100 factorial would 100 times 99 times 98
times 97, all the way down to times one
and the result of that is 9.332622 to the power of 157
which is a pretty large number.
Now, how about zero factorial?
Well, by definition that's equal to one.
So, zero factorial is one.
If you're wondering about negative numbers,
the factorials for negative numbers are undefined.
So, I have on the screen the factorial algorithm,
the steps for calculating the factorial.
We start out by saying if num is equal to zero,
so if we're taking num factorial,
if num is equal to zero,
then the factorial is one
and we stop, we have the result.
Otherwise we set the multiplier to one
and we set the factorial to one
and then while the multiplier is not equal to num,
we do steps five and six.
We multiply factorial by multiplier
and we assign the result to factorial
and then we add one to multiplier
and so, we'll say one times one,
add one to multiplier, so multiplier will become two,
so we'll have one times one times two
and then we'll assign two to factorial
and then we'll multiply that by three
and so, we'll assign six to factorial,
we'll multiply that by four,
assign 24 to factorial et cetera
and we keep going until multiplier
is equal to num at which point we stop.
So, that's another way of looking at it
instead of counting down and going three times two times one
for six factorial,
we can also say one times two times three.
It'll give us the same result.
So, in this algorithm,
we basically have a rinse-and-repeat step
which is step number four.
Step number four says that while the multiplier
is not equal to num, do steps five to six.
So, how would we code this?
Let's go out to IntelliJ
and we'll write the function
that calculates the factorial in an iterative way.
So, we'll use a for loop.
So, here I am in IntelliJ and I've created a project,
the package is academy.learnprogramming.recursion
and I'm going to write a method
to calculate the factorial in an iterative fashion
and that means we're not going to use recursion.
So, I'm gonna say public static,
static because we'll be calling it from the main method,
it's gonna return an integer,
the factorial and I'll call it iterativeFactorial
and of course we wanna pass in num.
So, the first thing we'll check is whether num equals zero
because if num equals zero,
we know that the result is one.
And so, we'll just return one.
If num doesn't equal zero,
we'll set a field called factorial to one
and then we'll say for int i equals one,
i less than or equal to num, i++
factorial is assigned factorial times i.
And when we drop out of the loop,
we have the factorial, so we'll just return that.
So, what's happening here,
let's say we wanted to calculate three factorial
'cause we know that that's six,
so num is not equal to zero,
so we don't return, we'll set factorial to one,
i has to be less than or equal to three,
'cause we're passing in three,
so on the first iteration, the loop factorial
will be assigned factorial times one
and we start out with factorial being one,
so factorial will get one times one which is one,
i will become two, so factorial gets one times two
which is two and then i becomes three,
so factorial gets two times three which six
and then at this point,
i becomes four, it's no longer less than or equal to num,
so we drop out
and so, we return six.
So, that means three factorial is six.
And so, this an iterative implementation.
We're not using recursion,
the method does not call itself.
So, what about a recursive implementation?
Well, instead of using the loop,
we can have the method call itself
because think about it,
two factorial is one factorial times two,
three factorial is two factorial times three,
four factorial is three factorial times four.
I'm gonna write these out in a comment
so you can see what I mean,
so one factorial and usually we write factorial
using exclamation marks,
so one factorial equals zero factorial
which we know is one times one
which equals one, right?
Two factorial equals two times one
and this is actually two times one factorial
because we know that one factorial is one.
Three factorial equals three times two
times one and that's equivalent to three
times two factorial
because two factorial is two times one,
so that's three times two factorial.
Four factorial is equal to four
times three times two times one.
And that's equivalent to four
times three factorial because three factorial
is equal to three times two times one.
So, you can see the pattern now.
So, one factorial is I guess I should reverse that
for consistency, so one times zero factorial,
two factorial is two times one
which is two times one factorial,
three factorial is three times two times one
which is equivalent to three times two factorial,
four factorial is four times three
times two times one
which is equivalent to four times three factorial.
Five factorial would be five times four
times three times two times one
which is equivalent to five times four factorial.
And so, to calculate each factorial,
we can use a factorial.
Basically we multiply the num, the number
by n minus one factorial.
So, basically we're doing the following.
To get n factorial, that equals n minus one factorial
times n, right?
I'll do it like that
because that's how I wrote it above.
So, basically this is the formula we can use
to get the factorial of n,
it's equal to n times n minus one factorial.
And so, let's write a method
that uses this information.
So, we'll say public static int
and we'll call this one recursiveFactorial
and we'll pass in num as we did before
and we'll start out the same way.
If num equals zero,
then we return one.
We know that zero factorial is one.
Otherwise what are we gonna return?
Num times recursiveFactorial of num minus one.
Because we've just said that we can calculate
the factorial of n by multiplying n
by n minus one factorial
and so, here we're calling the same method,
we're calling the method itself
to get the value and here you can notice in the gutter,
IntelliJ has added this icon here
to tell us that we're making a recursive call.
But how does this actually work?
Let me move this up.
So, let's say we call recursiveFactorial
with a value of three.
Well, we're going to say does num equal zero?
No, it doesn't, so we'll come down
and we'll say okay,
we want to return three times recursiveFactorial of two.
Now, this doesn't return right away
because what's gonna happen
is we have to wait until we get the value
of recursiveFactorial num minus one,
and so, what will happen
is the call to recursiveFactorial
with a value of three is going to pushed
onto what's called the call stack
and then recursiveFactorial two
is going to be executed.
So, we haven't returned from recursiveFactorial three
'cause we have to wait for this result
and then we come into recursiveFactorial
with two into this call,
num isn't zero, so this time we're going to want
to return two times recursiveFactorial
of two minus one which is one,
so now the recursiveFactorial call
with the value two has to wait
and so, it's going to get pushed
onto the call stack
and recursiveFactorial one is going to be called.
So, basically at this point, we have two calls
to recursiveFactorial that are waiting
for a return value,
we call recursiveFactorial one,
one isn't zero, so we're gonna come down here
and return one times recursiveFactorial
of one minus one which is zero.
So, now the recursiveFactorial call with one
is gonna get pushed on the stack
because it's waiting and we call recursiveFactorial zero,
so we're gonna come in here,
ah, this time num is zero,
so we return one and this call is finished,
it doesn't get pushed onto the stack
but now the recursiveFactorial call with zero returns
and that's the call that recursiveFactorial
with the value one is waiting for.
So, now that call can resume
and it gets the return value of one
and so, it multiplies one by one
and it returns one
and now the call to recursiveFactorial two
can resume because it was waiting
for the return value of recursiveFactorial one.
And so, it multiplies two by one,
to get two, it returns two
and now the call to recursiveFactorial three can resume
because it was waiting for the return value
of recursiveFactorial two.
And so, it multiplies three by two,
it gets six, it returns and we have finished,
there's no more calls to recursiveFactorial
waiting on the call stack
and so, six gets returned
but you'll notice that the order
in which the recursive calls are made,
they return in the reverse order.
So, basically the situation that we have,
so we start out with calling recursiveFactorial three
and when it hits this line,
it calls recursiveFactorial two.
So, it can't return until it gets the value
of recursiveFactorial two and so, the call
to recursiveFactorial three
gets pushed onto the call stack.
Then recursiveFactorial two is called.
It can't return until it gets the result
of recursiveFactorial one.
And so, it gets pushed onto the call stack.
And then recursiveFactorial one
will get pushed onto the call stack
and recursiveFactorial zero
will actually return right away,
so when recursiveFactorial zero returns,
this gets popped off the call stack
and it continues executing
and it will return one
and when that returns, this gets popped up
off the call stack, it continues executing
and returns the value two
and finally this gets popped off the call stack
and it returns the value six.
That's how recursion works.
And it's important to see that when you enter
a recursive method, it might be a while
before it returns.
You can go down the rabbit hole
and you can go down, so when you see recursion
in the upcoming sort algorithms
that we're going to look at,
keep in mind that the call to a recursive method
may result in many more calls
before it returns, so it's important to understand
that a three-line recursive method
could result in hundreds of recursive calls.
The code might look simple
but it can lead to a tonne of processing.
And it's really important to understand
that none of the recursive calls return
until they receive the result
from the method that they invoked recursively,
so as we saw, recursiveFactorial three
invoked recursiveFactorial two,
so recursiveFactorial three is not going to return,
it can't return until recursiveFactorial two
has finished executing.
You'll notice here that the recursive calls
are ended when we pass num equals zero
because when we pass in num equals zero,
we don't make a recursive call, we just return one.
If we didn't have this condition,
we'd never end, we'd just keep making recursive call
after recursive call after recursive call.
So, in order for recursion to work properly,
you need some condition
that's going to end the recursion.
And that condition is known as the breaking condition
and it's also called the base case.
So, in the recursiveFactorial method,
this if num equals zero condition
is the base case or the breaking condition.
At that point, when num equals zero,
we say that the recursion starts to unwind,
so at that point it's gonna return a value
and the method that invoked it recursively
will now be able to continue executing
and then it will return a value
and the method that invoked it recursively
will be able to continue executing et cetera.
So, when you use recursion,
you need a breaking condition.
If you don't have one,
what will happen is the method
will keep calling itself recursively
and eventually you'll get a stack overflow exception
because the call stack only has a certain amount
of memory allocated to it.
And so, eventually you'll blow that memory.
So, let's run our recursive code.
Well, we'll run them both actually.
Let's System.out.print line
and we'll print out iterativeFactorial of three
and we'll do the same thing for recursiveFactorial three
and we should see six in both cases.
Let's run.
And sure enough, we get two sixes.
For fun, for fun and giggles,
let's remove the or just comment out this breaking condition
and you're gonna see what happens here,
it's not gonna be pretty.
And look at that.
We get all these recursive calls
until eventually we get a stack overflow error.
And so, we just keep, this method just keeps calling itself
and calling itself and calling itself
and there's nothing to stop it from doing that
and so, we have all these,
you're actually looking here at the call stack here,
so you're looking at all of the methods
that are on the call stack
and as you can see, it just keeps invoking itself
until we blow the call stack space.
I'll uncomment that now.
So, that's recursion.
Now, here's something interesting.
The iterative implementation usually runs faster
and it doesn't use as much memory
because there's overhead involved with pushing method calls
onto the call stack
and each stack frame uses some memory
but sometimes the iterative way isn't as intuitive
or if you write the algorithm
in an iterative way, it'll be like a 500-line method
or something like that,
so developers still use recursion
because it's often the most elegant
and more easier to understand solution.
Now, when we're dealing with the recursive method,
the call stack can also be referred
to as the recursion stack
and we saw that when we don't have a breaking condition,
we'll get a stack overflow exception.
It's possible to get that exception
even when you do have a breaking condition.
If you write a recursive method
and it invokes itself 1,000 times,
you're still possibly going
to get a stack overflow exception
because you're not hitting that breaking condition.
So, even if you have a breaking condition,
if you call the recursive method
with something that's going to cause the method
to invoke itself a million times,
you're gonna get a stack overflow error.
So, just keep that in mind.
Now, this is a way around this potential blowing
of the stack, it's called tail recursion
but we're not going to see that for two reasons.
First of all, none of the algorithms we look at,
none of the implementations use tail recursion
but the second and perhaps more important reason
for Java is that the Java compiler
doesn't use tail recursion,
so we can use that type of recursion in Java.
I'm just mentioning it to make you aware
that it exists and if you wanna read up on it yourself,
I've linked to a Dr. Dobbs article
in the Resources section,
so if you're interested in reading about tail recursion
in Java, you can go ahead and take a look at that article.
Anyway, I hope that this has refreshed your memory
about recursion and now that we're all on the same page,
we're gonna move on and look at a recursive sort algorithm
called merge sort.
I'll see you in the next video.